Starlight Tours
Manroop D., Chelsea T., Amelia F., Jasleen S., Erika B. P., Parleen N., Muhammad Z., Salman A. & Yahya S.

Imagine you are an Indigenous man leaving a friend’s apartment when the police suddenly stops you, accuses you of causing trouble, and force you into the back of their cruiser. Instead of taking you to a station, they drive you to the outskirts of Saskatoon on a bitterly cold night, remove your handcuffs, and abandon you beside a power plant with no coat and no help. You start walking because stopping means freezing to death. 





This is the story of Darrell Night, and it reflects the same situation many others faced during the Starlight Tours, including people who did not survive.

The Story of Darrel Night
Lawyer Don Worme, Darrell Knight (centre) and Rosa Desjarlais react to the verdict during a new conference in Saskatoon on Sept. 20, 2001. (Saskatoon StarPhoenix — Richard Marjan) PHOTO BY RICHARD MARJIN /CANWEST
https://bit.ly/4paortQ

Madalynn, H. (2023, June 2). Spheres of Influence. https://bit.ly/4oyURgF

Derek ,M. (2016, April 8). Saskatoon Police patrol 20th Street and Avenue D in the Riversdale neighbourhood of Saskatoon.Maclean’s.https://bit.ly/48LYWta


Introduction
The Starlight Tours refer to incidents in Saskatoon during the 1990s and early 2000s where police officers picked up Indigenous men, drove them to the outskirts of the city, and abandoned them in freezing temperatures. Several men were later found frozen to death. These incidents were hidden from the public, with victims falsely portrayed as intoxicated wanderers. The Starlight Tours have become a symbol of systemic racism, police misconduct, and the state’s failure to protect Indigenous communities.


November, 1990
Neil Stonechild
Neil Stonechild, a 17 year old young adult, went missing. He was last seen in police custody. Found three days later, frozen to death. 
Late 1990s-early 2000
Two more Indigenous men found, found in wilderness deep winter – also frozen to death.
Rodney Naistus & Lawrence Wegner
January, 2000
The only person to survive the Starlight Tours – initiated the investigations 
Darryl Night
Historical Context of Starlight Tours

Relevant Cases
A key survivor that exposed the truth behind the Starlight Tours. January 2000, he was picked up by two SPS – Constable Dan Hatchen and Ken Munson. They drove him to outskirts of the city leaving him in subzero temperatures. Night was forced to walk through the snow, eventually found a power plant, where he was able to call a taxi. He filed a formal complaint – revealing systemic racism and abuse of police power.  
Neil Stonechild, a Cree teenager, disappeared on November 29, 1990 in Saskatoon. Stonechild was last seen in police custody – found frozen three days later in weather around -28°C. Initial investigation was dismissed. 

Case remained cold until 2000 – public inquiry revealed that SPS officers were involved, but no officers were ever criminally charged.
Neil Stonechild 
Darryl Night

Why did the police force do this?
The government has made numerous attempts to eliminate Indigenous identity throughout history. This systematic race has permitted police officers to consider Indigenous lives less valuable, which exposes Indigenous people to significant risk. The negligent and disdainful behaviour of the government and police towards this community has created an environment of racism and hatred where it has become normal to discriminate against, kill, or abandon Indigenous people on the outskirts of the city. The Starlight Tours are another way to express the police’s determination to eradicate Indigenous lives. Most of the victims were last seen in police custody, which implies the power police hold in discriminating against and eradicating minority groups in society. 

Since these lives did not have any value in the eyes of the government or society, their sudden deaths were not considered to be murder. Indigenous victims were always blamed and portrayed to be at fault, making society think that their deaths were insignificant.  



What does this signify about the treatment of Indigenous communities? 
CHELSEA DO THIS

Jessica McDiarmid’s Highway of Tears
CHELSEA DO THIS 

Conclusion
The Starlight Tours reveals how racism and the police’s abusive behaviour can lead to devastating consequences

Innocent Indigenous men were taken from the city, abandoned in the dark without protection or direction and left to look after themselves in deadly conditions

These deaths were deeply rooted in discrimination and hatred, and for years remained hidden from society, implying how easily injustices can be ignored when it targets marginalized groups

References
Legal AID Saskatchewan. (n.d.) Freezing deaths: The Starlight tours. Gladue Rights Research Database.
https://gladue.usask.ca/node/2860 

Susanne. R, Robert. R. (n.d.) Starlight Tours. University of Toronto.
https://jackmanlaw.utoronto.ca/indigenous-perspectives/starlight-tour 

Richard, M. (2001, Sept. 20). Lawyer Don Worme, Darrell Knight (centre) and Rosa Desjarlais react to the verdict during a new conference in Saskatoon on. [Photograph]. Saskatoon StarPhoenix.

Madalynn, H. (2023, June 2). Canada’s Best-Kept Secret: Starlight Tours. [Photograph]. Spheres of Influence.
https://bit.ly/4oyURgF 

Derek ,M. (2016, April 8). Saskatoon Police patrol 20th Street and Avenue D in the Riversdale neighbourhood of Saskatoon. [Photograph]. Maclean’s. 
https://bit.ly/48LYWta 



